
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 75020 ***

Transcriber’s notes:

The text of this e-book has been preserved as in the original,
including archaic spellings, but some illustrations have been
repositioned closer to the relevant text. Italic text is denoted by
_underscores_. Subscripted text is enclosed within curly brackets
preceded by an underscore.




[Illustration: AN OPERATION ON THE EYE

From an MS. of the XIII century]

[Illustration: A SURGEON PERFORMING AN OPERATION

From a woodcut of the XVII century]




ANÆSTHETICS

ANTIENT AND MODERN

AN

HISTORICAL SKETCH

OF

ANÆSTHESIA

BURROUGHS WELLCOME & CO.

London (Eng.)

_Branches_: New York Montreal Sydney Cape Town

[All rights reserved




INDEX


                                       PAGE

  Anæsthesia, Dawn of,                    7

  Anæsthesia, Chloroform for,            69

  Anæsthesia in Romance,                 23

  Anæsthesia in Roman Times,             17

  Anæsthesia in the Antient Poets,       25

  Anæsthesia, Local, in Antient Times,   27

  Anæsthetic, an Antient Chinese,        18

  Anæsthetics, Early Egyptian,            7

  Anæsthetic, an Early Irish,            19

  Anæsthetic, Freezing as an,            27

  Anæsthetic, Mesmerism as an,           34

  Anæsthetics used by the Hindus,        18

  Anæsthetics, Chemical Era of,          30

  Anæsthetics in the Middle Ages,        19

  Anæsthetics, Local,                    67

  Anæsthetics of Antient Greece,         11


  Carbon Tetrachloride,                  67

  Chloric Ether,                         58

  Chloroform, Discovery of,              58

  Chronology,                            73

  Cocaine,                               68

  Colton, Dr. G. Q.,                     41


  Davy, Sir Humphry,                     33


  Ether Epoch,                           44

  Ether, Sulphuric,                      33

  Ethyl Bromide,                         67

  Eucaine,                               68


  Faraday, Michael,                      33


  Holmes, Dr. Oliver Wendell,            52

  Hypnotism,                             37


  Indian Hemp,                            9


  Jackson, Charles T.,                   50


  “Letheon”,                             52

  Lycoperdon,                            19


  Mandragora,                            11

  Methyl Chloride,                       66

  Morphine,                              29

  Morton, W. T. G.,                      54


  Nitrous Oxide Era,                     41

  Novocaine,                             69


  Opium,                                 27

  Oxygen,                                30


  Priestley, Joseph,                     32


  Simpson, Sir James Young,              63

  Stovaine,                              69

  Sulphuric Ether,                       33


  Wells, Horace,                         42




[Illustration:

  Comment adam et eue furent crees au ij · et au · iiij · c · de genesis

  _From a woodcut of the XV century_

  “And the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he
  slept: and He took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh instead
  thereof.”

  _Genesis, chap. ii, verse 21_]




ANÆSTHETICS, ANTIENT AND MODERN

AN HISTORICAL SKETCH OF ANÆSTHESIA

    “So God empal’d our Grandsire’s (Adam’s) lively look,
    Through all his bones a deadly chilness strook,
    Siel’d up his sparkling eyes with Iron bands,
    Led down his feet (almost) to Lethe’s sands;
    In briefe so numm’d his Soule’s and Bodie’s sense,
    That (without pain) opening his side from thence
    He took a rib, which rarely He refin’d,
    And thereof made the mother of Mankind.”


[Sidenote: The Dawn of Anæsthesia]

Thus a sixteenth century poet quaintly describes, and draws an
impression of, from sacred records, the first operation tempered
by anæsthesia. It has been claimed that in the “deep sleep” that
the Creator “caused to fall upon Adam” is the germ of the idea of
anæsthesia that has come down to us from the dim ages of the past. It
is probable that primitive man employed digital compression of the
carotid arteries to produce anæsthesia, as the aboriginal inhabitants
of some countries do to-day. According to Caspar Hoffmann, this method
was practised by the antient Assyrians before performing the operation
of circumcision. Curiously enough the literal translation of the Greek
and Russian terms for the carotid is “the artery of sleep.”

[Sidenote: Early Egyptian anæsthetics]

The antient Egyptians are believed to have used Indian hemp and the
juice of the poppy to cause a patient to become drowsy before a
surgical operation. Pliny relates that they applied to painful wounds
a species of rock brought from Memphis, powdered, and moistened with
sour wine, which is the first record we have of local anæsthesia with
carbonic acid gas.

[Sidenote: The “Wine of the Condemned”]

The “sorrow-easing drug” which, as we are told in the fourth book of
the “Odyssey,” was given by Helen to Ulysses and his comrades, probably
consisted of poppy juice and Indian hemp. It is indeed actually
stated that she learned the composition from Polydamnia, the wife of
Thone, in Egypt. It is possible also that the “wine of the condemned,”
mentioned by the prophet Amos, may have been a preparation of these
drugs.

[Illustration: MANDRAGORA (_the Phallus of the Field_)

Inscribed in cuneiform characters and in Egyptian hieroglyphics ca.
3000 B.C.]

There are several passages in the Talmud which point to the fact that
the practice of easing the pain of torture and death, by stupefying the
sufferers, was a very antient one.

Thus it is stated: “If a man is led forth to death, he is given a cup
of spiced wine to drink, whereby his soul is wrapped in night”; and
again, “Give a stupefying drink to him that loseth his life, and wine
to those that carry bitterness in their heart.”

In connection with crucifixion, which was a common punishment for
malefactors among the Jews before the Christian era, with the sanction
of the Sanhedrin, the women were wont to ease the terrible death agony
of the sufferers by giving them something in the nature of a “wine of
the condemned” upon a sponge. It is probable that the “wine mingled
with myrrh” which, according to St. Mark, was offered to Christ before
nailing Him upon the Cross, was indeed a narcotic draught, given with
the object of lessening His sensibility to the agony.

The earliest reference to anæsthesia by inhalation is contained in the
works of Herodotus, who states that the Scythians were accustomed to
produce intoxication by inhaling the vapour of a certain kind of hemp,
which they threw upon the fire or upon stones heated for the purpose.
This was probably _Cannabis indica_, or Indian hemp, which was
employed by Oriental races as an anæsthetic from very early times.

[Sidenote: Anodyne poultices to deaden pain]

At the siege of Troy the Greek army surgeons employed anodyne and
astringent poultices to assuage the pain of the wounded. Thus
Patroclus, when his dagger from the thigh of Euryphylus--

    Cut out the biting shaft; and from the wound
    With tepid water cleansed the clotted blood;
    Then, pounded in his hands, the root applied
    Astringent, anodyne, which all his pain
    Allay’d; the wound was dried, and stanched the blood.

  _Iliad._

[Illustration: GATHERING MANDRAGORA

From an MS. of the XII century]

From this interesting description of the manner in which the early
Greek surgeons treated a wound, it is evident that, although they had
no actual knowledge of anæsthetics, they had found from experience the
advantage of cleansing the wound and applying an astringent and anodyne
dressing to deaden sensibility to pain, which probably, unknown to
them, also possessed antiseptic qualities.




MANDRAGORA AS AN ANÆSTHETIC

[Sidenote: The anæsthetics of antient Greece]

That the early Greeks also used certain methods for deadening
sensibility to pain is evidenced by several of the antient writers.
Pindar states “Machaon eased the sufferings of Philoctetes with a
narcotic potion.” Theocritus also alludes to Lucina, the goddess of the
obstetric art, as “pouring an insensibility to pain down all the limbs
of a woman in the throes of labour.” Aphrodite, to assuage her grief
for the death of Adonis, is said to have thrown herself on a bed of
lettuce and mandragora.

There is no medicinal plant around which cluster more mysterious and
quaint associations than mandragora. The Babylonians employed it more
than 2000 years B.C., and a figure cut from the root was used at that
early period as a charm against sterility. It is probable that the
antient Hebrews also believed it to possess these properties, judging
from the story of Rachel related in the book of Genesis. The early
Egyptians employed mandragora, which they called the “phallus of the
field,” as a medicinal agent, both as an anodyne and an anæsthetic, and
also used it in many of their superstitious rites.

[Illustration: GATHERING MANDRAGORA

From an MS. of the XIII century

  “To gather ye mandragora, go forthe at dead of nyght and take a dogge
  or other animal and tye hym wyth a corde unto ye plante. Loose ye
  earth round about ye roote, then leave hym, for in hys struggles to
  free hymself he wyll teare up ye roote, which by its dreadfull cryes
  wyll kyll ye animal.”]

Theophrastus is the earliest writer on botany to allude to the virtues
of mandragora, among which he mentions its property of inducing
sleep, and of its use as an aphrodisiac in love potions. The Greeks
gave mandragora the name of “Circeum,” derived from that of the witch
Circe, and believed that an evil spirit dwelt in the plant; for, when
uprooted, it was said to utter such frightful shrieks that no mortal
man might hear them and live.

To prevent this catastrophe, it was usual in gathering the plant
to take a dog and let him be sacrificed to the rage of the demon.
This method is thus described by an antient writer:--“To gather ye
mandragora, go forthe at dead of nyght and take a dogge or other animal
and tye hym wyth a corde unto ye plante. Loose ye earth round about ye
roote, then leave hym, for in hys struggles to free hymself he will
teare up ye roote, whych by its dreadfull cryes wyll kyll ye animal.”

Certain rites and ceremonies were sometimes performed before gathering
the root, such as making three circles round it with a sword, and the
earth being loosened with an ivory spade, while to drown the cries of
the fatal herb a horn was sometimes blown by the gatherer.

According to an antient German legend, the mandragora always grew with
greater luxuriance beneath or near a gallows, for the flesh of the
felons hanged thereon was believed to nourish the mysterious root in
which the demon dwelt. Another legend current was, that the leaves of
the plant sometimes glowed with a peculiar light at night.

The supposed likeness of the root to the human form gave rise to many
of the superstitions connected with mandragora, and it was believed in
early times that there were actually two distinct species, viz., male
and female. These roots were often carved to resemble the human figure,
and were worn as charms to ward off disease.

[Illustration: MANDRAGORA

From an MS. of the XV century]

[Sidenote: Mandragora as an anæsthetic]

The first mention of mandragora (_Mandragora Atropa, L._), as an
anæsthetic, is made by Dioscorides (_ca._ A.D. 100), who evidently
recognised the difference between the hypnotic and anæsthetic effects
of the drug, from which one may assume that it was employed for both
purposes in the medical practice of that day. Respecting the former,
he states: “Eating which [mandragora] shepherds are made sleepy,” and,
referring to the latter property, he remarks that “three wine-glassfuls
of a liquid preparation of the root are given to those who are about to
be cut or burnt, for they do not feel the pain.”

Of the preparations of mandragora, he gives the following: “There are
those who boil the root in wine to a third part, and preserve the
decoction, of which they give a cyathus [small glass] in want of sleep
or severe pains in any part, and also before operations with the knife,
or the actual cautery, that they may not be felt”; also “a wine is
prepared from the bark of the root, without boiling, and three pounds
of it are put in a cadus [eighteen gallons] of sweet wine; of this,
three cyathi are given to those who require to be cut or cauterised,
when, being thrown into a deep sleep, they do not feel any pain.”

[Sidenote: “Morion,” a Grecian anæsthetic]

Dioscorides also refers to a substance called “morion,” believed to be
the white seed of the mandragora root, which is mentioned also by Pliny
as a narcotic poison. “A drachm of it,” he states, “taken in a draught,
or in a cake or other food, causes infatuation, and takes away the use
of the reason; the person sleeps without sense, in the attitude in
which he ate it, for three or four hours afterwards. Physicians use it
when they have to resort to cutting or burning.”

These allusions serve to prove how frequently anæsthesia was practised
by the physicians of antient Greece, to whom the narcotic property of
mandragora, which is allied to _Atropa Belladonna_, or deadly
nightshade, was well known.

[Illustration: GATHERING MANDRAGORA

From a drawing of the XVI century

The plant is being uprooted by the struggling dog, whilst a horn is
blown to drown the cries of the fatal herb]

The younger Pliny (A.D. 32–79), in his “Natural History,” also
describes the use of mandragora as a narcotic, and gives preference to
the use of the leaves over the root for that purpose. “The dose,” he
says, “is half a cyathus, taken against serpents, and before cuttings
and puncturings, that they may not be felt.” He further adds: “For
these purposes it is sufficient for some persons to seek sleep from the
smell,” from which it is clear that this anæsthetic was also used by
inhalation.

With reference to mandragora, Sir Benjamin Ward Richardson once
prepared a draught according to one of the recipes given by
Dioscorides, and took it. He tells us that “the phenomena repeated
themselves with all faithfulness, and there can be no doubt that, in
the absence of our now more convenient anæsthetics, ‘morion’ might
still be used with some measure of efficacy for general anæsthesia.”

Further allusion is made to mandragora as a surgical anæsthetic by
Apuleius in his “Liber de Herbis,” in which he says: “If anyone is to
have a limb mutilated, burnt, or sawn, he may drink half an ounce of
mandragora with wine; and while he sleeps the member may be cut off
without any pain or sense.”

Avicenna, the Father of Arabian medicine, gives special directions as
to the employment of mandragora, both as an anæsthetic and a hypnotic;
while Averrhöes, another Arabian physician, refers to the soporific
effects of the fruit of the same plant. Galen also alludes to its
powers to paralyse sensation, and Paulus Ægineta states: “Its apples
are narcotic, when smelled to, and also their juice, that if persisted
in they will deprive the person of his speech.” According to Isidorus,
“a wine of the bark is given to those about to undergo operations,
that, being asleep, they feel no pain”; and Serapion confirms this
statement in his works.

[Sidenote: Anæsthesia in Roman times]

Evidence of the practice of surgical anæsthesia is to be found in the
writings of several physicians during the time of the Roman Empire.
It is probable that the practice came to them from the Greek school,
for mandragora, which they almost invariably used, grew largely in the
Grecian Archipelago. Celsus recommends a pillow of mandragora apples to
induce sleep.




HINDU ANÆSTHETICS

From ancient records it appears probable, that the Hindus inhaled the
fumes of burning Indian hemp as an anæsthetic at a period of great
antiquity. As early as the year 977 they also knew of other drugs which
they employed for the same purpose.

Pandit Ballala describes an interesting surgical operation which was
performed on King Bhoja at that period. The patient was suffering from
severe pain in the head, and, his condition becoming critical, two
brother-physicians happened to arrive in Dhar, who, after carefully
considering the case, came to the conclusion that a surgical operation
was necessary to give relief. They are said to have administered to him
a drug called _sammohini_ to render him insensible, and while he
was completely under its influence they trepanned his skull and removed
the real cause of the complaint. They closed the opening, stitched up
the wound, and applied a healing balm.

After the operation, they are said to have administered to the King a
drug called _sanjivini_, to accelerate the return of consciousness
and to minimise the chances of death.

[Sidenote: An antient Chinese anæsthetic]

It is recorded that “a Chinese physician named Hoa-Tho, who lived about
A.D. 220 or 230, was accustomed to administer to his patients on whom
he wished to perform painful operations, a preparation called ‘Ma-yo’
(Indian hemp, probably), the effect of which was that, after a few
moments, they became insensible as if they were deprived of life.”

Miss Isabella Bird, when visiting the Tung-wah Hospital, in Hong-Kong,
states: “The native surgeons do not use chloroform in operations, but
they possess drugs which throw their patients into a profound sleep,
during which the most severe operations can be performed. One of them
showed me a bottle containing a dark brown powder, which, he said,
produced this result; but he would not divulge the name of one of its
constituents, saying it was a secret taught him by his tutor.”

From very early times the fumes of burning lycoperdon (_Lycoperdon
gygantum_) have been used for stupefying bees before taking honey
from the hive.

Thus it will be seen from the many allusions we have quoted from
writers in the early ages, it is evident that mandragora and Indian
hemp were the two drugs which were more or less in general use as
anæsthetics in antient times.




ANÆSTHETICS IN THE MIDDLE AGES

[Sidenote: An early Irish anæsthetic]

In a Celtic manuscript of the twelfth century on materia medica, a
preparation called “potu oblivionis” is mentioned, of which mandragora
was probably an ingredient. A draught of this preparation was used by
the early Irish to induce sleep.

[Sidenote: The “Sleeping Sponge”]

[Sidenote: Method of using the “Sleeping Sponge”]

Coming to the fifteenth century, the method of producing insensibility
to pain by the inhalation of the volatile principles of drugs, which
had been handed down by tradition from the early ages, seems to have
been revived by Hugo of Lucca, a Tuscan physician. He is described
as “chief of a school of surgeons that treated wounds with wine,
oakum and bandaging, with happy success.” Theodoric, his son, who
was a monk-physician, and practised surgery, mentions, in 1490, a
preparation used by his father which he calls “oleum de lateribus.”
This he describes as “a most powerful caustic, and a soporific which,
by means of smelling alone, could put patients to sleep on occasion of
painful operations which they were to suffer.” The mixture was placed
on a sponge in hot water, and then applied to the nostrils of the
patient, and was called the “spongia somnifera.” The following is the
composition of the “sleeping sponge” and the method of using, as stated
by Theodoric: “Take of opium, of the juice of the unripe mulberry, of
hyoscyamus, of the juice of hemlock, of the juice of the leaves of
mandragora, of the juice of the woody ivy, of the juice of the forest
mulberry, of the seeds of lettuce, of the seeds of dock, which has
large round apples, and of the water-hemlock, each an ounce: mix all
these in a brazen vessel, and then place in it a new sponge; let the
whole boil as long as the sun lasts on the dog-days, until the sponge
consumes it all, and has boiled away in it. . . . As oft as there shall
be need of it, place this sponge in hot water for an hour, and let it
be applied to the nostrils of him who is to be operated on until he has
fallen asleep, and so let the surgery be performed.”

[Illustration: AN OPERATION ON THE LIVER

From an MS. of the XIV century]

According to Bodin, the sleep produced was so profound that the patient
often continued in that condition for several days afterwards. The
method of arousing the patient employed by Hugo, however, is thus
described: “In order to awaken him, apply another sponge, dipped in
vinegar, frequently to the nose, or throw the juice of fenugreek into
the nostrils; shortly he awakens.”

According to Canappe, in his work “Le Gyidon pour les Barbiers et
les Chirurgiens,” published in 1538, the “Confectio soporis secundum
dominum Hugonem” was used by surgeons at that period.

[Illustration: A SURGEON AMPUTATING A LEG

From a woodcut of the XVI century]

Reginald Scott, in a work written in the sixteenth century, gives the
following recipe for making an anæsthetic: “Take of opium, mandragora
bark and henbane root, equal parts; pound them together, and mix with
water. When you want to sew or cut a man, dip a rag in this, and put it
to his forehead and nostrils. He will soon sleep so deeply that you
may do what you will. To wake him up, dip the rag in strong vinegar.
The same is excellent in brain-fever, when the patient cannot sleep;
for if he cannot sleep, he will die.”

[Sidenote: Anæsthesia in romance]

The writers and poets of mediæval romance in more than one instance
allude to anæsthesia produced by drugs. Boccaccio, who wrote his
“Decameron” in 1352, in the story of Dionius, alludes to a certain
anæsthetic liquid of Surgeon Mazzeo della Montagna, of Salerno. “The
doctor,” he says, “supposing that the patient would never be able to
endure the pain without a soporific, deferred the operation until the
evening, and in the meantime ordered the water to be distilled from a
certain composition, which, being drunk, would throw a person asleep as
long as he judged it necessary.” Boccaccio, probably, borrowed his idea
from the recipe given by Nichols, a provost of the famous old school of
Salerno, who published a recipe for making an anæsthetic, similar to
that of Reginald Scott.

In Brooke’s “Tragicall Historye of Romeus and Julietta,” printed in
1562, which supplied Shakespeare with the plot and much material for
his play “Romeo and Juliet,” Friar Laurence thus speaks to Julietta: “I
have learned and proved of long time the composition of a certain paste
which I make of divers somniferous simples, which beated afterwards
to powdere, and dronke with a quantitie of water, within a quarter of
an houre after, bringeth the receiver into such a sleepe, and burieth
so deeply the senses and other spirits of life that the cunningest
phistian will judge the party died.

“And, besides that, it hath a more marvellous effect, for the person
which useth the same feeleth no kind of grief, and, according to the
quantitie of the draught, the patient remaineth in a sweete sleepe; but
when the operation is perfect and done, he returneth unto his first
estate.”

[Illustration: A SURGEON AMPUTATING A LEG

From a woodcut of the XVI century]

Shakespeare’s references to mandragora, poppy and other “drowsy
syrups,” are too well known to need quotation; but the following
allusion by Middleton, in his play called “Women beware Women!” is not
without interest:--

    I’ll imitate the pities of old surgeons
    To this lost limb, who, ere they show their art,
    Cast one asleep, then cut the diseased part.

William Bulleyn, the author of “A Bulwark of Defence against Sickness,”
who practised as a surgeon in the reign of Henry VIII, describes an
anæsthetic which he directs to be prepared from the juice of a certain
herb (probably mandragora) “pressed forth, and kept in a closed earthen
vessel according to art, bringeth deep sleep, and casteth man into a
trance, or deep terrible sleep, until he shall be cut of the stone.”

[Sidenote: Allusions to anæsthesia by antient poets]

The poet Marlowe thus refers to mandragora in his play “The Jew of
Malta”:--

    _Barabas_:

    I drank of poppy and cold mandrake juice,
    And being asleep, belike they thought me dead,
    And threw me o’er the walls.

Du Bartas, as translated by Sylvester in 1592, makes the following
allusion to anæsthesia:--

    Even as a surgeon minding off to cut
    Som cureless limb; before in use he put
    His violent engins in the victim’s member,
    Bringeth his patient in a senseless slumber:
    And griefless then (guided by use and art)
    To save the whole, saws off the infested part.

Porta, writing in 1579, says: “It is possible to extract from
several soporific plants a quintessence, which is to be shut up in a
well-covered leaden vessel, lest the drug should evaporate. When it is
to be used, the lid is to be removed and the medicament held to the
nostrils, when its vapour will be drawn in by the breath and attack the
citadel of the senses, so that the patient will be sunk in a deeper
sleep not to be shook off without much labour.”

[Illustration: A SURGEON PERFORMING AN OPERATION ON THE EYE

From a woodcut of the XVII century]

Besides mandragora, opium, Indian hemp, and other plants with narcotic
properties already referred to, that were used for anæsthetic purposes
in mediæval times, certain substances are mentioned by early writers
that cannot be identified. Thus Albertus Magnus mentions an animal
product, of which he says: “Any person smelling it falls down as if
dead and insensible to pain,” but there is no reference to such a drug
by other writers of the period.

[Sidenote: Local anæsthetics in antient times]

Local anæsthesia was not unknown during the middle ages, and Cardow
recommends the inunction of a mixture consisting of “opium, celandine,
saffron, and the marrow and fat of man, together with oil of lizards.”
He also adds: “If the patient drinks wine in which the seeds of the
patulica marina have been steeped for a week, it will prevent him
feeling any pain.”

[Sidenote: First mention of freezing as an anæsthetic]

Bernard mentions that it was customary in Salerno to mix the crushed
seeds of poppy and henbane, and apply them as a plaster, to deaden
sensibility, to parts that were about to be cauterised; while
Bartolinus states that local anæsthesia was sometimes produced by
freezing, thereby foreshadowing the use of ether and ethyl chloride as
local anæsthetics.

[Sidenote: Boerhaave’s anæsthetic]

During the seventeenth century the belief in the narcotic draughts of
the antients for producing anæsthesia appears to have waned, and few
allusions are made to them until the middle of the eighteenth century,
when fresh interest seems to have been excited in the subject. The
famous Boerhaave is said to have used opium as an anæsthetic, both
by inhalation of its vapour and also by internal administration in
powder. According to Van Swieten, in his commentaries upon Boerhaave’s
“Aphorisms,” the following is given as the recipe: “Oil of cinnamon, 2
drops; oil of cloves, 1 drop; citron peel, 2 grains; sugar, 2 drachms.
Mix and add red coral, prepared, 1 drachm; pure opium, 2 grains. Mix
for two doses, one of which is to be taken one hour before the
operation, and the other one quarter hour before it, if the patient has
not slept.”

[Illustration: AN OPERATION IN THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY

From a painting by Franz Hals]

[Sidenote: An operation on the King of Poland]

In 1782, Weiss is said to have operated on the foot of Augustus,
King of Poland, having previously placed the royal patient under the
influence of “a certain potion surreptitiously administered.” Shortly
afterwards Sassard, a surgeon of La Charité, in Paris, suggested
that patients who were about to be operated upon should be drugged
with narcotics as a means of preventing shock. That this method was
sometimes practised is evidenced from a chapter in “Bell’s Surgery,”
where the author not only refers to it but objects to the method on
account of the sickness and vomiting it produced.

As late as 1847, Chisholm, of Inverness, recorded his use of a drug
given internally to produce anæsthesia for surgical purposes; he
substituted the internal use of morphine for ether inhalation in a case
of ablation of the breast successfully performed upon a woman, who
declared that she felt no pain during the operation.

[Sidenote: Anæsthesia by compression of the carotid arteries revived]

Other means of producing insensibility were suggested in the eighteenth
century, and the antient method of compressing the carotid arteries was
revived. This method had been used by Valverdi about 1560, and Morgagni
employed it about 1750 in his experiments on animals, and suggested
that it might be used on human beings. Compression of the nerves of the
limb about to be removed, was also proposed, by James Moore in 1784,
and tried by Hunter and others, but the results could not be regarded
as successful.

[Sidenote: Nelson’s arm amputated]

Surgical operations at this time meant periods of agonising pain, and
the stoutest hearts often quailed at the prospect. It is said that Lord
Nelson was so painfully affected by the coldness of the operator’s
knife when his right arm was amputated at Teneriffe, that at the Battle
of the Nile he gave orders to his surgeon to have hot water kept
ready, so that at the worst he might be operated upon with a warm knife.

[Sidenote: The dawn of a new era]

Thus from the dawn of creation anæsthesia for surgical operations
had been practised to some extent, but, owing to the uncertainty of
the potency and action of the powerful narcotics and palliatives
administered, and the danger attending their use when exact science was
unknown, the practice seemed likely to fall into oblivion. At last a
series of brilliant discoveries in chemistry created a new epoch in the
history of anæsthesia.




THE CHEMICAL ERA OF ANÆSTHETICS

[Sidenote: Priestley’s discoveries]

The discoveries of Priestley about 1767 led up to the plan of
administering gases and vapours of definite composition by inhalation
through the lungs, and directly he had demonstrated the existence of
“vital air,” or oxygen, the properties of this body were tested in the
hope of great results in the art of medicine. Priestley’s experiments
concerning the inhalation of oxygen were in time followed by those
of Beddoes, who recommended the inhalation of oxygen, hydrogen and
other gases in the treatment of disease. It seemed only natural that
experiments with other gases and vapours by inhalation should follow.
Pearson, of Birmingham, administered ether in this way in 1795 for the
relief of consumption, and ten years afterwards Warren, of Boscombe,
employed ethereal inhalation to relieve the sufferings attending the
later stages of phthisis.

Priestley’s discoveries of the method of liberating and collecting
gases, and his demonstrations that certain gases could be absorbed
and compressed in water, led to the introduction of aërated
waters--carbonic acid gas being the first to be employed.

[Illustration: JOSEPH PRIESTLEY]

In the course of time, nitrous oxide, which had been discovered by
Priestley in 1776, was compressed in water, and came into general
use as a medicinal agent.

[Sidenote: Anæsthetic properties of nitrous oxide]

In 1798, a Medical Pneumatic Institution was established at Bristol by
the exertions of Beddoes and others, and Humphry Davy was appointed
superintendent. It was here that he commenced and carried on his
notable researches on nitrous oxide. In one of his experiments he
constructed a box or chamber in which he inhaled the gas in measured
quantities. One day, in the year 1799, when suffering from toothache
or inflammation of the gums, he resorted to the inhalation of the
gas, and discovered to his great delight that it relieved the pain,
which led him to the conclusion he expresses in the following words in
“Researches Chemical and Philosophical,” 1800: “As nitrous oxide in its
extensive operation seems capable of destroying physical pain, it may
probably be used with advantage during surgical operations in which no
great effusion of blood takes place.”

[Illustration: SIR HUMPHRY DAVY]

[Sidenote: Faraday points out similarity in the effects of nitrous
oxide and sulphuric ether]

About 1806, Woolcombe, of Plymouth, prescribed for Lady Martin, a
patient suffering from asthma, the inhalation of sulphuric ether
to relieve the attacks. Lady Martin found the inhalation gradually
caused her to become unconscious, from which state she would recover
in a short time, with the result that the paroxysm of dyspnœa had
disappeared. But the teaching of this case, and even the more explicit
account of Humphry Davy, was overlooked; and no further development
occurred until the year 1818, when Faraday pointed out, in “The
Quarterly Journal of Science and Arts,” that the inhalation of the
vapour of sulphuric ether produced effects similar to those caused by
nitrous oxide.

[Illustration: MICHAEL FARADAY]

About this time Professor Thompson, of Glasgow, was accustomed annually
to amuse his students by allowing them to inhale ether and nitrous
oxide until they were intoxicated, and occasionally became unconscious,
when it was noticed that they were insensible to the prick of a pin,
or a blow. In these cases the gas or ether was inhaled from a bladder.
Two drachms of rectified and washed ether were poured into a bladder
and allowed to diffuse. Then the mixture of air and ether vapour was
breathed, the expired air being allowed to enter the bladder also.
Curiously enough, very little improvement has been made on this method
of administration to the present day.

[Sidenote: On the brink of the discovery]

It is an extraordinary fact that, even in the face of such experiments
as those we have referred to, no one among the investigators who stood
at this time on the brink of so great a discovery ventured over the
threshold. It is almost inconceivable in these days to realise, that
for thirty-nine years these substances were used for experimental
purposes, and even for amusement, without a realisation of the great
blessing to humanity that lay almost within grasp. The things that are
apparently most plain may lie longest buried; so with the discovery of
efficient anæsthesia, which even then developed in an indirect manner.




MESMERISM AS AN ANÆSTHETIC

[Sidenote: Mesmerism in antient times]

[Sidenote: Healing by “stroking”]

From the earliest ages the apparent power of some men to influence
the minds and bodies of others has been known. Certain diseases were
said to be affected by the touch of the hand of certain persons,
who were supposed to communicate a healing virtue to the sufferer,
and these practices were often connected with religious and magical
rites. This method of healing was practised in antient times by the
Chaldæans, Babylonians, Egyptians, Persians, Hindus, Greeks and Romans.
Their priest-physicians are said to have effected cures and to have
thrown people into deep sleep in the precincts of the temples. Such
influences were at that time held to be due to supernatural power, a
belief which was no doubt fostered by the priesthood. In the middle
of the seventeenth century an Irishman named Valentine Greatrakes
aroused great interest in England by his supposed power of being able
to cure scrofula by stroking the patient with his hand. Most of the
distinguished scientific men of the day, such as Sir Robert Boyle,
witnessed and attested his cures, and thousands of sufferers crowded
to him from all parts of the country. Since his time other men have
come forward with similar claims, notably one Gassner, a Roman Catholic
priest of Swabia, who in the early part of the eighteenth century
attracted attention by stating that he could cure the majority of
diseases by exorcism. His method had an extraordinary influence over
the nervous systems of his patients, who in the end generally confessed
themselves cured.

[Sidenote: Mesmer’s experiments]

In 1766, Mesmer, who was a pupil of Hehl, professor of astronomy at
Vienna, and an advocate of the efficacy of the magnet for the cure
of disease, met Gassner, and observed that the priest effected cures
without the use of magnets and by manipulation alone. This led him to
believe that some kind of occult force resided in himself, by means of
which he could influence others. He held that this force permeated the
universe, and more especially affected the nervous systems of men. In
1778, he removed to Paris, and shortly afterwards the French capital
was thrown into a state of great excitement by the fact that human
beings could be placed in a state of artificial sleep or trance, which
was then called “mesmerism.”

Mesmer’s disciples claimed that even painful operations could be
performed on patients in this condition without consciousness of pain.

[Sidenote: Braid’s researches on hypnotism]

[Sidenote: Esdaile operates on hypnotised patients]

Braid, who made a further investigation of the subject, dissented
from the mesmerists as to the cause of the phenomenon, and called the
condition “hypnotism.” In 1846, the Deputy-Governor of Bengal appointed
a committee to observe and report on the surgical operations that
were then being performed in India by Esdaile upon his patients, while
under the influence of alleged mesmeric agency. The Committee reported
on various experiments carried out under their observation, some of
which had apparently been performed with great success. But from
further investigation it was apparent that the method was uncertain,
and success seemed to be due to the peculiar susceptibility of the
patient operated upon. These experiments are worth recording, as they
indirectly led to the practice of administering certain vapours to
produce anæsthesia.

[Sidenote: Robert Collier one of the first pioneers]

One of the pioneers in the practice of inhalation was Robert H.
Collier, who was a believer in mesmerism. In 1835 he was present at
a lecture given by Dr. Turner, Professor of Chemistry at University
College, London, and in the course of some experiments in the
inhalation of ether was himself rendered unconscious, and also observed
that his fellow-students who had inhaled it were insensible to pain.
Four years later he went to America, and, while visiting his father’s
estate near New Orleans, he was called to one of the negroes who had
become insensible by inhaling fumes from a vat of rum, and who, in
falling, had dislocated his hip. Finding the muscles flaccid, Collier
reduced the dislocation without exciting the least sensation of pain in
the patient. A little later he performed two operations upon patients
while under mesmeric influence, with apparent success. These facts led
him to connect the phenomenon of mesmerism with narcotism produced
by inhalation, and in 1840 he commenced a lecturing tour throughout
America on the subject. Three years later he returned to this country,
and at Liverpool, where he landed, gave his first lecture, which
he illustrated by experiments in mesmerism, and also showed the
possibility of rendering a subject unconscious by the fumes of alcohol
in which poppy-heads and coriander had been macerated. The theory he
advanced, and attempted to prove throughout, was that the so-called
mesmeric influence was identical in action with that of narcotic
vapours.

[Sidenote: Uses his alcoholic mixture as an anæsthetic in 1842]

He claimed to have administered the fumes of his alcoholic mixture to a
Mrs. Allen, of Philadelphia, in 1842, and while under its influence he
extracted a tooth without causing her pain. Collier’s lectures excited
general attention at the time, and there is little doubt that they gave
a fresh impetus to research on the subject of anæsthesia by inhalation.
He must therefore be regarded as an important pioneer, who, had he
given up his ideas of mesmerism and proceeded systematically with his
plan of making the body insensible by inhaling the vapour of alcohol,
would have had no one to dispute with him in priority.




THE NITROUS OXIDE ERA

Although, as already stated, Humphry Davy had discovered the anæsthetic
properties of nitrous oxide as far back as the year 1800, forty-four
years elapsed before his idea was put into practical use.

[Sidenote: Colton lectures on nitrous oxide]

On December 11th, 1844, Dr. G. Q. Colton, a well-known lecturer on
popular scientific subjects in America, and a pupil of Professor
Turner, of London, delivered a lecture at Hartford, Connecticut, during
which he gave a demonstration of the action of nitrous oxide gas.
Horace Wells, a dentist, then in practice in the same town, formed one
of the audience.

[Illustration: HORACE WELLS]

[Sidenote: Wells makes his historic experiment]

Among the persons who were invited by the lecturer to inhale the gas
for the amusement of the audience was a man named Cooley, who wounded
himself severely by falling against the benches, and only became aware
of the fact when he saw the blood. Wells was greatly struck by this
incident, and he determined to test the anæsthetic effects of the gas
upon himself the next day by having a decayed upper molar extracted
while under its influence. After the lecture he asked Dr. Colton if
he would come to his house and administer the gas to him; and, on
receiving his promise, he induced a Dr. Riggs to be the operator.

The historic event is described by the latter as follows: “A few
minutes after I went in, and, after conversation, Dr. Wells took a seat
in the operating chair. I examined the tooth to be extracted, with a
glass, as I usually do. Wells took a bag of gas from Dr. Colton and sat
with it in his lap, and I stood by his side; he then breathed the gas
until he was much affected by it: his head dropped back, I put my hand
to his chin, he opened his mouth, and I extracted the tooth. His mouth
still remained open some time. I held up the tooth with the instrument
that the others might see it; they, standing partially behind the
screen, were looking on. Dr. Wells soon recovered from the influence of
the gas so as to know what he was about, discharged the blood from his
mouth, and said, ‘A new era in tooth-pulling!’ He said it did not hurt
him at all. We were all much elated, and conversed about it for an hour
later.”

[Illustration: “A NEW ERA IN TOOTH-PULLING”

The first dental operation performed on Horace Wells whilst under the
influence of nitrous oxide gas]

[Sidenote: “A new era in tooth-pulling”]

After this, Wells extracted several teeth from his patients under
nitrous oxide gas with equal success, and then went to Boston in order
to make his discovery known to the medical profession in that city.
He remained there some days in the hope of being allowed to try the
gas in a case of amputation in the Massachusetts General Hospital,
but the experiment was postponed. Dr. Warren, senior surgeon to the
institution, however, invited him to address his class on the subject
of anæsthesia, after which he was asked to administer the gas in a case
of tooth extraction. He was assisted on this occasion by Morton, a
Boston dentist who had been his pupil, and afterwards, for a time, his
partner. The experiment, as Wells himself confesses, was not quite a
success, the gas-bag having been removed too soon. The whole thing was
denounced as a piece of humbug, and Wells was hissed out of the room as
an impostor.

[Sidenote: Wells disheartened by failure]

[Sidenote: The death of Horace Wells]

Disheartened at length by the failure of his repeated attempts to
establish his claims to priority as the discoverer of anæsthesia, his
mind appeared to become affected, and for a time he wandered about the
streets of New York. On January 4th, 1848, he was arrested and charged
with throwing vitriol, but while in gaol he opened his radial artery,
having first inhaled ether to make death painless. This sad event
closed, at the age of thirty-two, the career of Horace Wells, to whom
at least belongs the credit of having first shown the practicability of
producing insensibility by nitrous oxide, and of having thus, in his
own words, “established the principle of anæsthesia.”




THE ETHER EPOCH

Probably the first published account of the use of ether as a medicinal
agent was made by Morris in a letter read before the Society of
Physicians in London,[1] on December 18th, 1758, in which he advocates
its use internally, and also as an external application.

  [1] “Med. Obs. and Enq.” by the Society of Physicians in London, vol.
  2, page 176, 1764.

In 1818, Faraday, as already stated, had called attention to the
anæsthetic properties of ether, and showed that the vapour of sulphuric
ether, when inhaled, produced effects similar to those of nitrous
oxide. After Wells’ failure at Boston nothing further seems to have
been done for a time to investigate the use of nitrous oxide as an
anæsthetic.

[Sidenote: Early experiments with ether]

In 1839, William E. Clarke, a young medical student of Rochester, New
York, was in the habit of amusing some of his friends, among whom was
another student named W. T. G. Morton, by the inhalation of ether.
Emboldened by his experiences, in 1842 he is said to have administered
ether, by means of a towel, to a young woman named Hobbie, and
during the period of insensibility which followed, one of her teeth was
extracted by a dentist named Elijah Pope.

J. Marion Sims relates the following incident which he states happened
in the year 1839:--“A number of youths in Anderson, South Carolina,
were exhilarating themselves one day with the seductive vapour of
ether. In their excitement they seized a young negro who was watching
their antics, and compelled him to inhale the drug from a handkerchief
which they held over his mouth and nose by main force. At first his
struggles only added to the amusement of his captors, but they soon
ceased as the boy became unconscious, stertorous and apparently
dying. After an hour or two of anxiety on the part of the spectators
he, however, revived, and was apparently no worse for his alarming
experience.”

[Sidenote: Long claims to have used ether in 1842]

Three years after this incident one of the participators in the affair,
named Wilhite, became the pupil of Dr. Crawford W. Long, a physician
then practising in Jefferson, Jackson County, Georgia. Both the doctor
and his pupils used occasionally to amuse themselves by inhaling ether,
and the former often noticed that while thus excited he was insensible
to blows and bruises. Wilhite recounted to him his memorable experience
with the negro boy; and, in March, 1842, Long is said to have persuaded
a patient, on whom he was about to operate for a small encysted tumour,
to inhale ether until he was insensible. The patient consented, and
the tumour was removed without any pain or accident. This memorable
event was simply recorded by Long in his ledger thus:--“James Venable,
1842. Ether and excising tumour, $2.00.” Three months later he removed
another tumour from the same patient in a similar way, and also
performed three other operations during that year. He is said to have
again repeated the experiment in 1843 and 1845, but the district in
which he lived was so far removed from contact with the large cities
and centres of thought, that the discovery remained unknown and
unpublished until long after the anæsthetic properties of ether had
been fully proved elsewhere. Long himself admits that he considered
ether impracticable owing to the shortness of the anæsthetic state, and
he therefore abandoned its use.

[Sidenote: Marcy’s experiment]

Towards the end of the year 1844, Dr. E. E. Marcy, a surgeon of
Hartford, is said to have administered ether to a patient, and to have
removed an encysted tumour about the size of a walnut from the scalp.

It is stated that Horace Wells was present at this operation, which was
quite successful, but, being warned that ether was dangerous to life,
the experimenters abandoned its use in favour of nitrous oxide gas.

[Sidenote: Morton’s experiments with ether]

In 1846, W. T. G. Morton (referred to previously) who had been
in partnership with Wells as a dentist, and assisted him in the
unfortunate experiment with nitrous oxide in Boston, now directed his
attention to the finding of a more suitable anæsthetic for painless
operations in dental surgery. After many unsuccessful attempts with
various narcotics, Charles T. Jackson, a chemist of Boston, whose
pupil he had been, suggested that he should try sulphuric ether, the
properties of which had been known for so long.

[Illustration: CHARLES T. JACKSON]

[Sidenote: Jackson’s story]

It was about the end of September, 1846, that Jackson states he
informed Morton that he had experimented on himself by inhaling ether
on a folded towel. He found that he lost all power over himself, and
fell back in his chair in a state of curious sleep. Morton, however,
tells another story, and relates how, having procured some chemically
pure ether on September 30th, 1846, he shut himself in a room alone and
inhaled the vapour. He states: “I found the ether so strong that it
partly suffocated me, but produced no decided effect. I then saturated
my handkerchief and inhaled it from that. I looked at my watch and soon
lost consciousness. As I recovered I felt a numbness in my limbs, and
a sensation like nightmare. I thought for a moment I should die in
that state, but at length I felt a slight tingling of the blood in the
end of my third finger, and made an effort to press it with my thumb,
but without success. At the second effort I touched it, but there
seemed to be no sensation. I attempted to rise from my chair, but fell
back, and looked immediately at my watch and found that I had been
insensible between seven and eight minutes.”




THE FIRST DENTAL OPERATION UNDER ETHER

Morton soon had an opportunity of making a practical experiment with
the anæsthetic, for the same evening, about nine o’clock, a man
named E. H. Frost called upon him suffering from a violent attack of
toothache. “Can’t you mesmerise me?” asked the sufferer. “Upon which,”
says Morton, “I told him that I had something better than mesmerism by
means of which I could take out his tooth without giving him pain. He
gladly consented, and saturating my handkerchief with ether, I gave
it to him to inhale. He became unconscious almost immediately. It was
dark, and Dr. Hayden held the lamp. My assistants were trembling with
excitement, apprehending the usual prolonged scream from the patient
while I extracted a firmly-rooted bicuspid tooth. I was so agitated
that I came near throwing the instrument out of the window. But now
came a terrible reaction. The wrenching of the tooth had failed to
rouse him in the slightest degree. I seized a glass of water, and
dashed it in the man’s face. The result proved most happy. He recovered
in a minute, and knew nothing of what had occurred.”

[Sidenote: First surgical operation under ether]

Morton next appealed to Dr. John C. Warren, who was then Senior Surgeon
at the Massachusetts General Hospital, and obtained permission to test
his new anæsthetic on a patient about to undergo a surgical operation.
The date fixed was Friday, October 16th, 1846, and at the appointed
time a large number of medical men had assembled in the theatre. Morton
administered the anæsthetic successfully, and the operation, which was
for a congenital vascular tumour of the neck, in a young man named
Gilbert Abbot, was completed in about five minutes without a groan from
the patient. When it was finished, Dr. Warren exclaimed: “Gentlemen,
this is no humbug!” The interest excited amongst those who witnessed
the operation was naturally very great, and Dr. Henry J. Bigelow, who
was present, said to a friend whom he met later in the day: “I have
seen something to-day that will go round the world!” His prophecy
proved correct.

Up to this time Morton had not disclosed the nature of the agent
he employed, and nothing more was done until November 7th, when he
expressed his willingness to reveal the secret. On this date two major
operations were performed under ether, one by Dr. Hayward and the other
by Dr. Warren.

From this time ether took its place as a general anæsthetic, and the
practice of anæsthesia was firmly established.

[Sidenote: The origin of the words “anæsthesia” and “anæsthetic”]

Soon after the memorable 16th of October, a meeting was held in
Boston, to choose a name for the new anæsthetic agent, and the word
“letheon” was chosen by Morton himself; but, subsequently, Dr. Oliver
Wendell Holmes suggested the name “anæsthesia” for the condition, and
“anæsthetic” for the agent, which names have since come into general
use.

Although it has never been very clearly established whether Morton
or Jackson was the prime originator of the use of ether as an
anæsthetic, the former was recognised by the United States Government
as the discoverer, and received from it a handsome award. It seems
most probable that Jackson supplied the inspiration, while Morton
practically demonstrated it.

[Illustration: W. T. G. MORTON]

In reviewing the steps which led up to the discovery, it must not be
forgotten that both Morton and Jackson were after all but followers
of Collier, who first rendered himself unconscious with ether in the
laboratory of University College, London, and forged one of the most
important links in the chain of development.

Morton spent most of the remainder of his life in disputes about
priority, and in efforts to secure recognition. He died bankrupt
and broken-hearted on July 15th, 1868, before he had completed his
forty-ninth year.

Curiously enough, Jackson, like Wells, became insane, and died in
an asylum in 1880. When the friends of the rival claimants of the
discovery of anæsthesia were proposing that monuments should be erected
to each, Oliver Wendell Holmes characteristically suggested that all
should unite in erecting a single memorial, with a central group
symbolising painless surgery, a statue of Jackson on one side, a statue
of Morton on the other, and the inscription underneath:--

  TO E(I)THER

The news of the “ether process for removing pain,” as it was then
called, spread rapidly. A private letter from Dr. J. Bigelow to Dr.
Francis Boote, of Gower Street, carried the first news to England,
and was communicated to the medical profession in London on December
17th, 1846. Two days later, Mr. James Robinson, a dentist, of Gower
Street, performed the first dental operation under ether in England,
the patient being a Miss Lonsdale, and the operation the extraction of
a firm molar tooth.

On December 21st the first surgical operation under the new anæsthetic
in England was performed by Robert Liston, in University College
Hospital, London.

[Sidenote: First surgical operation under ether in Great Britain]

In the operating theatre, thronged with students, were the late Sir
John Erichsen, the present Lord Lister, and many other famous surgeons.
Mr. Barton relates an amusing incident which happened prior to the
operation. Before the patient was brought in, the anæsthetist asked the
students who crowded the benches in the theatre from floor to ceiling
for some volunteer who would submit himself to be anæsthetised. A
young man, Sheldrake, of very powerful build and a good boxer, at once
offered to take the new anæsthetic, and came into the arena. “He lay on
the table, and the anæsthetist proceeded to administer the ether. After
the administration had proceeded for about half a minute, the subject
of the experiment suddenly sprang up and felled the anæsthetist with a
blow, and, sweeping aside the assistants in the arena, sprang shouting
up the benches, scattering the students, who fled like sheep before a
dog. He fell at the top bench, where he was seized and held down till
he regained his senses. The whole scene hardly occupied a minute.”

[Illustration: An apparatus called “Letheon”

One of the earliest employed for the administration of Ether]

[Sidenote: New method of administration]

Before operating, Liston addressed a few words to those present as
to the nature of the experiment about to be tried. The ether was
administered by Mr. William Squire in an apparatus he had devised,
which consisted of a large bell-shaped receiver containing the ether,
to which was attached a long tube and mouthpiece. The patient, a
middle-aged man, who was suffering from malignant disease of the skin
and tissues of the calf of the leg, for which amputation of the thigh
was deemed necessary, passed easily into complete insensibility, and
Liston rapidly removed the thigh, the cutting operation being declared
to have lasted only thirty-two seconds. In a few moments the patient
completely recovered consciousness, and apparently did not know that
the limb was off. When the towel was removed from the uplifted stump so
that he could see it, he burst into tears and fell back on his pillow.
Both surgeon and patient were much affected, and the scene in the
theatre was most impressive. All appeared to see what an incalculable
boon was in store for the human race, and Liston could scarcely command
his voice sufficiently to speak.

[Sidenote: A story of Liston]

Some amusing stories are related of Liston, who was a very big,
powerful man. His fine physique was often useful in the pre-anæsthetic
days, when a patient’s nerve gave way at the last moment at the sight
of the crowded theatre and the operating-table with its straps. It is
said that on one occasion a patient, losing his courage at the last
moment, rushed shrieking down the long corridor of the hospital, with
Liston at his heels. The man locked himself in a room, but the surgeon
with his shoulder broke in the door, and half-dragged half-carried the
poor wretch back to the operating theatre, where the operation for
stone was successfully performed.

[Sidenote: First surgical operation under ether in Scotland]

The practice of using ether was soon followed in other hospitals,
and not only medical men but distinguished laymen crowded to witness
its use. In Scotland, Dr. Moses Buchanan, Professor of Anatomy in
Anderson’s University, was the first to have news of the event, and
immediately after his lecture that day he experimented with ether
inhalation. On the following day, in the operating theatre of Glasgow
Royal Infirmary, a patient was placed under the anæsthetic and
successfully operated on for fistula. So rapidly, indeed, did the
practice spread from one centre to another, that by the end of the
first quarter of 1847 the use of the new anæsthetic may be said to have
become general in all operation cases.

[Sidenote: Simpson proves value of ether in midwifery]

The value of ether in midwifery practice still remained to be proved,
and Sir James Simpson was the first to suggest and test its use in this
department. On January 9th, 1847, he first administered ether to a
patient in order to facilitate the operation of turning. The result, he
reported, was most satisfactory and important, for it at once afforded
evidence of the one great fact upon which the whole of the practice
of anæsthesia in midwifery is founded, viz., that though the physical
sufferings of the patient could be relieved by the inhalation of ether,
yet the muscular contractions of the uterus were not interfered with.




THE DISCOVERY OF CHLOROFORM AS AN ANÆSTHETIC

The next epoch-making event in the history of anæsthesia was the
discovery of the anæsthetic properties of chloroform. The substance
itself had been known for over a quarter of a century. Thomson, in
his “System of Chemistry,” 1820, describes a liquid which is formed
by the union of chlorine and olefiant gas, called “Dutch liquid,” or
chloric ether. Early in the year 1831, Samuel Guthrie of Brimfield,
Massachusetts, who was then residing in Sackett’s Harbour, New York
State, in consequence of a statement that he had read that the
alcoholic solution of this chloric ether was useful in medicine as a
diffusible stimulant, devised an easy method of preparing it. This
being done, he wrote an article which he entitled “A Spirituous
Solution of Chloric Ether,” and forwarded it to the editor of the
“American Journal of Science and Art,” in which it was published in
October of the same year. In this article he fully describes his
method of preparation. A few months later, in January, 1832, Soubeiran
published a paper in a French journal, stating that he had discovered
this method in 1831, and to the distilled fluid he produced he had
given the name of “bichloric ether,” the formula being CHCl. Still a
third claimant to the discovery came forward in the person of Liebig,
who published his account in November, 1831, six months after Guthrie’s
manuscript was in the publisher’s hands, and one month after its
publication. The formula which Liebig deducted from his analysis was
C_{4}Cl_{5}, and he called his product “chloride of carbon.” Although
there may be some doubt as to which of these claimants was actually the
first to manufacture the liquid, it is clear that Guthrie was the first
to publish the account of the discovery. He was born in 1782, was a
surgeon in the United States Army in 1812, and died in 1848.

From an account given by D. B. Smith, of Philadelphia, in the “Journal
of the College of Pharmacy”[2] in 1832, there can be little doubt that
the liquid first made by Guthrie was a fairly pure chloroform. He
describes it in the following words: “The action of this ether on the
living system is interesting, and may hereafter render it an object of
importance in commerce. Its flavour is delicious, and its intoxicating
properties equal to or surpassing those of alcohol.” In 1834, Dumas
examined the liquid as prepared by Soubeiran, and declared that he had
not obtained it pure, and further, that Liebig had made an error in its
composition. On further research, Dumas gave the liquid the name of
“chloroform,” and first worked out the real formula, C_{2}HCl_{3} (or,
using the present system of atomic weights, CHCl_{3}).

  [2] Now the “American Journal of Pharmacy”

[Sidenote: Previous use of chloroform in medical practice]

Although its narcotising properties were known to some extent, no one
who used it at that time seems to have conceived the idea of fully
testing its properties. In 1831, Ives, of Newhaven, treated a case of
difficult respiration by actual inhalation of the vapour, and published
the facts in “Silliman’s Journal” in January, 1832. Four years later,
Dr. Formby, of Liverpool, prescribed it in hysteria; and Tuson, of
London, employed it in the treatment of cancer and neuralgia in 1844.

[Sidenote: Simpson’s investigations]

The fact that one or two deaths had been attributed to the use of
ether about this time, caused many workers to make a search for other
agents with similar properties. Foremost among these investigators was
Dr. James Young Simpson, Professor of Midwifery in the University of
Edinburgh, who personally experimented with several chemical liquids in
the hope of finding something less disagreeable and persistent in smell
than ether.

[Illustration: DAVID WALDIE]

[Sidenote: Waldie suggests the use of chloroform]

About this time, Jacob Bell, a chemist, and a founder of the
Pharmaceutical Society, published a suggestion that chloric ether
should be used for inhalation instead of sulphuric ether; but his
suggestion was apparently never put into practice. In October, 1847,
Waldie, a chemist of Liverpool, was visiting Edinburgh, and in
conversation with Professor Simpson, suggested to the latter the use of
chloroform. He recommended the Professor to try it as an anæsthetic,
and promised to make and send him some on his return to his home in
Liverpool.

[Illustration: SIR JAMES YOUNG SIMPSON]

It appears to have been in that city that the drug was first introduced
and probably first used in England as a medicinal agent. Waldie
states that about the year 1838 a prescription was brought to the
Apothecaries’ Hall, Liverpool (where he held the position of manager),
of which one of the ingredients was chloric ether. The preparation was
at that timen apparently not known in this country, for Dr. Brett,
the chemist of the Company, specially prepared some from the formula
he found in the United States Dispensatory. Its properties pleased
some of the medical men, particularly Dr. Formby, by whom it was
introduced into local practice. Waldie, finding that the preparation
was not uniform in strength, improved the process by separating and
purifying the chloroform, and dissolving it in pure spirit, by which a
product of sweet flavour was obtained.

[Sidenote: On the eve of the great discovery.]

There seems little doubt that Waldie was the first to suggest the use
of chloroform, as an anæsthetic, to Professor Simpson, who at once
resolved to try it by experimenting on himself and his assistants. He
made the first experiment in his own house on November 4th, 1847, and
in a letter written to Waldie thus describes the event: “I am sure
you will be delighted to see part of the good results of our hasty
conversation. I had the chloroform for several days in the house before
trying it, as, after seeing it such a heavy, unvolatile-like liquid,
I despaired of it, and went on dreaming about others. The first night
we took it, Dr. Duncan, Dr. Keith and I all tried it simultaneously,
and were all ‘under the table’ in a minute or two.” Professor Miller,
who was a neighbour of Simpson’s, used to come every morning to see
if the experimenters had survived! He describes how, “after a weary
day’s labour, Simpson and his assistants sat down and inhaled various
drugs out of tumblers, as was their custom. Chloroform was searched
for and found beneath a heap of waste paper, and with each tumbler
newly charged the inhalers resumed their occupation. . . . A moment
more, then all was quiet; then a crash. On awakening, Simpson’s first
perception was mental. ‘This is far stronger and better than ether,’
said he to himself. His second was to note that he was prostrate on the
floor, and that among the friends about him there was both confusion
and alarm. Of his assistants, Dr. Duncan he saw snoring heavily, and
Dr. Keith kicking violently at the table above him. They made several
more trials of it on that eventful evening, and were so satisfied with
the results that the festivities did not terminate until a late hour.”

[Sidenote: Simpson achieves success]

On November 10th, 1847, Simpson communicated his discovery to the
Medico-Chirurgical Society of Edinburgh, in a paper entitled, “Notice
of a new anæsthetic agent as a substitute for sulphuric ether.” A day
or two afterwards an arrangement was made with Simpson to administer
the new anæsthetic to a patient who was about to be operated upon,
but, owing to some cause, he was unable to be present. The operation
went on without him, and the patient died on the first incision of the
knife. Simpson’s absence was providential indeed, for it saved the
reputation of chloroform at the outset. On November 15th, chloroform
was used for the first time in a surgical operation in the Edinburgh
Royal Infirmary. Three patients were operated on successfully under its
influence. One, who was a soldier, was so delighted with the effect
that, on awaking after the operation, he is said to have seized the
sponge with which administration had been made, and, thrusting it into
his mouth, again resumed inhalation more vigorously than before.

To Simpson, there is no doubt, belongs the merit of having made
anæsthesia triumph over all the opposition, which was at first,
actively, offered to its use. For this he well deserved the rewards
which fell upon him in the evening of his life.

Among those who aided in the establishment of the use of anæsthetics,
mention must be made of the work of John Snow, who by his researches
placed the practice on a scientific basis.

The advent of chloroform gave an impetus to other investigators in the
field of anæsthesia, and during the last fifty years many other bodies
have been introduced and tried with more or less success for the same
purpose. Methyl chloride, which was discovered by Dumas and Peligot,
was introduced by Deboe in 1887, who used it extensively in local
affections. In 1867, Sir B. W. Richardson introduced methyl bichloride
or methylene [methylene dichloride]. He formed a very high estimate of
its properties as a good general anæsthetic, and said he preferred it
for many reasons to chloroform, as he found that the anæsthetic sleep
was produced more quickly and was more prolonged.

Sir T. Spencer Wells also advocated its use, and stated, in 1872, that
it had fewer drawbacks than any then known anæsthetic. Tetra-chloride
of methyn [carbon tetrachloride], which much resembles chloroform,
was discovered by Regnault in 1839, and its anæsthetic properties
were first made known by Sansom and Harley in 1864. Simpson was of
the opinion that it had a more depressing effect upon the heart than
chloroform, and was more dangerous generally as an anæsthetic.

Nunneley, of Leeds, also contributed work of value in this department
of research, and introduced ethyl bromide and chloride of carbon. He
dispelled the idea, long prevalent, that anæsthetics could be found
only in a limited class of chemical compounds.

Among other substances which have been introduced during the last
twenty-five years, but which, owing to one defect or another,
have since been practically abandoned, mention should be made of
butylic hydride [butane], ethylene, amylene, ethyl nitrate, aldehyde
(introduced by Poggiale), carbon bisulphide, ethidene dichloride
[ethylene dichloride] (discovered by Regnault and first used as an
anæsthetic by Snow), and ethyl bromide, first prepared by Serullus in
1827.




LOCAL ANÆSTHETICS

Local anæsthesia, already alluded to as probably the earliest form of
numbing sensibility to pain, was practised in antient times by the
inunction of various narcotics, but after the seventeenth century the
practice seems to have almost entirely gone out of use. The latter end
of the nineteenth century, however, marks a new era in this department.

On September 15th, 1884, considerable interest was aroused by a
communication made at the Ophthalmological Congress at Heidelberg, by
Karl Koller, of Vienna, in which he demonstrated the effects of cocaine
as a local anæsthetic.

[Sidenote: The discovery of Cocaine]

The alkaloid now known as cocaine was isolated by Gädeke, from the
leaves of the _Erythroxylon Coca_ as far back as 1855. He called
it ethroxylene. Four years later a further investigation of the plant
was made by Nieman, who noticed that the leaves produced a numbness
of the tongue; and in 1874 Hughes Bennett demonstrated that cocaine
possessed anæsthetic properties. In 1880, Von Anrep, who made a careful
investigation of the drug, hinted that the alkaloid might be of use in
general surgery as a local anæsthetic, and Koller undertook a series
of experiments on animals in the laboratory of Professor Stricker, in
which he found that complete anæsthesia of the eye, lasting, on an
average, ten minutes, followed the introduction of a two per cent.
solution of the alkaloid.

The immense value of such an anæsthetic in ophthalmic operations
was universally recognised, and it at once came into general
use. In painful conditions of mucous surfaces, and for minor
operations, cocaine has been found of great service, and as a
local anæsthetic it has a large field of usefulness. Since the
introduction of cocaine, other substances have been brought forward,
which, after extensive trials, have proved to be of real clinical
value. Of these may be mentioned eucaine, a synthetic product
(benzoyl-vinyl-diaceton-alkamine) discovered by Merling, and first
studied by Vinci in Liebreich’s laboratory. Of the two forms of this
drug used, which are known as A and B, the latter was soon found to be
the only one suitable for producing local anæsthesia. Its properties
are similar to those of cocaine, with the exception that it produces
no vaso-constriction, and it is claimed that it is equal in anæsthetic
power, whilst its toxicity is very much less.

[Sidenote: Stovaine and Tropa-cocaine]

Stovaine, or benzoyl-ethyl-dimethylaminopropanol hydrochloride, more
recently introduced, is a synthetic product elaborated by Fourneau, and
derived from tertiary amyl alcohol. It is much less toxic than cocaine,
but its comparative value still remains to be proved by further trial.
Tropa-cocaine, a drug closely allied to cocaine, and derived from the
leaves of the Java coca plant, has recently been much used in Germany,
but it does not appear to possess any advantages over cocaine or
eucaine.

Novocaine, or para-amido-benzoyl-diethylamino-ethenol hydrochloride,
has lately been found to possess satisfactory properties as a local
anæsthetic in dental operations. It is said to be free from the toxic
and local irritant action common to other local anæsthetics.




THE NECESSITY FOR ABSOLUTE PURITY IN CHLOROFORM

[Sidenote: Administration of Chloroform]

[Sidenote: Purity an essential]

[Sidenote: Danger of impurities]

Considerable attention has been directed to different methods of
administering chloroform, and various forms of apparatus have been
devised which claim to reduce to a minimum the dangers of anæsthesia.
Assuming a most skilled and competent administrator, an ideal method of
administration, and a suitable patient, an unsatisfactory result can
only be attributed to the chloroform employed. Purity of chloroform
is a most important factor in contributing to safe anæsthesia. The
physician claims that absolute purity shall characterise all medicinal
agents, and the justice of the claim is acknowledged by the trend of
recent legislation. Purity is a prime essential of any anæsthetic.
The presence of impurities largely increases the risk inseparable
from the use of chloroform. The train of symptoms observed during the
normal process of anæsthesia may be masked and altered, and dangerous
results may supervene under the most competent, careful and observant
administrator.

[Illustration: AN OPERATION IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY]

[Sidenote: Expert testimony]

That some of the chloroform offered to the profession may reasonably
be regarded with suspicion is evidenced by the words of a prominent
obstetrician, based on the experience of 40 years in the use of
chloroform; this authority expresses himself as follows: “I may say I
fear the chloroform in common use is often far from being as pure as it
should be, and is sometimes very defective in this respect.”

[Sidenote: Effects of impurities]

Impurities may result from the process of manufacture, or from
decomposition. Conspicuous amongst these undesirable elements are
chlorine, hydrochloric acid and carbonyl chloride (phosgene), which
irritate the lining membrane of the respiratory tract and interfere
with the normal process of respiration. Such irritation may result in
arrest of cardiac action or may produce a severe form of bronchitis.
It is obviously of great importance that chloroform should be free
from irritating properties, that the respiratory passages should
not be obstructed, and that during anæsthesia the breathing and the
circulation should approximate the normal. Superadded to these results,
produced by local irritation, is the effect of other impurities which
exert their action after absorption. These latter markedly increase the
cardiac depression which has been shown to follow the administration
of pure chloroform. Such an action is difficult of detection, and is,
probably, in large degree responsible for a considerable number of the
accidents reported.

[Sidenote: Contradictory results]

[Sidenote: Recent research]

[Sidenote: Ethyl chloride]

Of recent years increased knowledge has elaborated exact tests, which
ensure the absence of these impurities. Nevertheless, anæsthetists of
wide experience have obtained results which could not be reconciled
with the use of pure chloroform. It has been observed that
different chloroforms, all of which answer the official tests for
purity, give effects which are difficult to harmonise, and the
interpretation of which only appears satisfactory on the assumption
that the chloroforms differ in composition. Whilst one chloroform acts
most satisfactorily, another produces, during the early stages of
administration, a marked excitement and an irregularity of breathing,
which prolongs the period of induction. Further investigation has
therefore been deemed necessary, and a comprehensive and careful
research has elucidated the cause of these hitherto unexplained
phenomena (Wade and Finnemore, “Journal of the Chemical Society,”
1904, 85, 938). In the chloroforms which produced anæsthesia in a
satisfactory manner, has been demonstrated the presence of ethyl
chloride in minute and varying quantities. When the undesirable
effects were noted, no ethyl chloride was detected in the anæsthetic.
A physiological test conclusively proved that ethyl chloride was the
factor which determined these differences.

[Sidenote: Value of the investigation]

A chloroform which had previously given undesirable effects, and
in which the presence of ethyl chloride could not be demonstrated,
was modified so as to contain a small proportion of the latter. The
chloroform then proved a most satisfactory anæsthetic, and there
was entire absence of the excitement and respiratory irregularity
previously observed. The results of this research are of the utmost
value. In the initial stages of the induction of chloroform anæsthesia,
the presence of a small quantity of ethyl chloride has a beneficial
effect, leading to the absence of mental excitement, and steadies
the breathing. The respiration is stimulated and becomes regular and
deep. In these circumstances, satisfactory anæsthesia is induced with
rapidity and ease.




A CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE OF CHIEF EVENTS AND DISCOVERIES IN THE HISTORY
OF ANÆSTHESIA

NITROUS OXIDE

  Joseph Priestley                                            1776
  Humphry Davy                                                1800
  Horace Wells (Colton, Riggs, Evans, Best)                   1844


ALCOHOL

  Collier                                                  1835–42


ETHER

  Michael Faraday                                             1818
  W. E. Clarke                                                1839
  Crawford W. Long                                            1842
  E. E. Marcy                                                 1844
  W. T. G. Morton                                             1846
  Charles T. Jackson                                          1846
  First surgical operation in America             October 16, 1846
  First surgical operation in Great Britain      December 21, 1846

  (Warren, Hayward, Bigelow, Boote, Robinson, Liston, Buchanan,
  Louget, Snow, Simpson, Bernard, Clover)


CHLOROFORM

  Guthrie                                                     1831
  Waldie                                                      1847
  James Young Simpson                                         1847
  First surgical operation under chloroform,
                                 in Edinburgh    November 15, 1847

  (Soubeiran, Liebig, Dumas, Flourens, M. Duncan, G. Keith,
  Snow, Nunneley, James Arnott)


COCAINE

  Gädeke                                                     1855
  Hughes Bennett                                             1874
  Von Anrep                                                  1880
  Koller                                                     1884

[Illustration: ‘Wellcome’ Brand Chloroform, 1/4 lb. in
drop bottle--exact size]




‘WELLCOME’ BRAND CHLOROFORM


[Sidenote: Ethyl chloride]

[Sidenote: Conforms to B.P.]

‘Wellcome’ Brand Chloroform represents the results of the most recent
researches. It embodies the essentials of purity and uniformity,
the necessary basis of a satisfactory chloroform. Some chloroforms
which satisfy official standards have yet been shown to vary in
composition and in effect, the result depending on the occurrence in
the preparation of a small and varying quantity of ethyl chloride.
‘Wellcome’ Brand Chloroform is of constant composition and gives
uniform effects. It conforms in every respect to the requirements
of the B.P., and contains a small and definite proportion of ethyl
chloride, which has been found to assist the satisfactory induction of
anæsthesia.

[Illustration: ‘Wellcome’ Brand Chloroform, 30 c.c., in
hermetically-sealed tube. Length of tube, 5-1/4 in.]

[Sidenote: Proved value]

[Sidenote: Confidence in administration]

‘Wellcome’ Brand Chloroform is the result of prolonged laboratory
experiment and careful clinical observation. Its reception by the
profession verifies the theory upon which its production is based. It
has been largely used in hospital and in private practice, and with
gratifying results. Reports from most experienced anæsthetists agree
in regarding ‘Wellcome’ Brand Chloroform as a distinct advance. Its
constancy in composition gives confidence in administration, and its
freedom from irritating and depressant principles removes the source
of many of the accidents which have hitherto been regarded as grave
objections to the employment of chloroform as an anæsthetic.

‘Wellcome’ Brand Chloroform is issued in 2 oz., 1/4 lb., 1/2 lb.
and 1 lb. amber-coloured bottles; also in 30 c.c. and 60 c.c.
hermetically-sealed tubes, as illustrated on the previous page.


‘WELLCOME’ BRAND ETHER

‘Wellcome’ Brand Ether is prepared specially for anæsthesia and is
thoroughly pure and reliable. When the administration of ether is
desired, this product will be found eminently suitable.

[Sidenote: Ideal packing]

The method of packing in hermetically-sealed tubes is especially
desirable with such a volatile substance as ether, and the shape of
the glass tube admits of the contents being readily transferred to the
graduated bottles usually employed.

[Sidenote: Conforms to B.P.]

‘Wellcome’ Brand Ether conforms to the requirements of the British
Pharmacopœia for _Æther Purificatus_, and has a specific gravity
of 0·720.

‘Wellcome’ Brand Ether is issued in hermetically-sealed tubes
containing 30 c.c. and 60 c.c., similar to the Chloroform packing
illustrated on the previous page.

The anæsthetics issued under the ‘Wellcome’ Brand denote the highest
degree of perfection and purity.


‘WELLCOME’ BRAND PRODUCTS

It is well known that considerable variation exists in the quality and
activity of the medicinal chemicals of commerce.

[Sidenote: The need for reliable Medicinal Chemicals]

Purity and reliability are matters of the utmost importance to
prescriber, dispenser and patient alike, and every opportunity should
therefore be taken to ensure the supply of only those chemicals and
galenicals which are known to be thoroughly pure and trustworthy.

In order that goods answering to this description in the highest sense
may be at the disposal of the profession, Burroughs Wellcome & Co.
manufacture and issue a series of fine chemicals, alkaloids, etc., to
which they have recently added a series of standardised liquid and
granular extracts and concentrated tinctures, under the distinctive
title of the ‘Wellcome’ Brand.

[Sidenote: Standardised galenicals]

[Sidenote: Physiological standards]

The advantages of galenicals containing a definite proportion of active
principle over those that vary in strength with every sample of drug
employed are now fully recognised, and several such have been admitted
into the Pharmacopœia. With regard to galenicals, Burroughs Wellcome
& Co. have extended the standardisation by total alkaloid assay, and
have never adopted the basis of total extractive, regarding it as
misleading and useless. Total alkaloid estimations have been adopted
in so far as they secured definite standards of truly representative
activity, but the firm has not been content to rely on this means
alone. As the result of extensive research, they are able to offer
many other standardised preparations in addition to the official ones.
Those galenicals which are known to be extremely variable in their
character and action, and by their nature do not admit of exact control
by chemical means, have been the subject of physiological research. Not
being satisfied with the methods hitherto available, special processes
of standardisation have been developed which give more complete
control over the finished products. This subject is still one of
continuous research.

The standards adopted have been chosen after the examination of
very many different samples of drugs, and represent the average of
the amounts of active principle found in preparations made from
good specimens. Thus the dose remains the same as that of the older
preparation, but the prescriber is certain of always obtaining the
proper effect instead of one varying from time to time with the
particular batch of extract of tincture used, and the advantage of this
certainty, both to the reputation of the prescriber and the health of
the patient, can hardly be over-estimated.

[Sidenote: Prolonged scientific research]

[Sidenote: ‘Ergotoxine’]

To attain the highest standard in these as in other preparations
for medicinal use, extensive scientific research and many technical
experiments have been made. Long-continued researches in the Wellcome
Chemical and Physiological Research Laboratories led to the issue of
‘Hemisine,’ a physiologically standardised product which presents the
active principle of the medulla of the supra-renal gland in a dry,
soluble state. It is perfectly stable in all climates, and permits of
the instant preparation of fresh reliable solutions possessing the
characteristic hæmostatic and other properties of the supra-renal
gland. Similarly, as the result of researches carried out at the
Wellcome Physiological Research Laboratories, crystalline salts of a
specific alkaloid, which produces the characteristic effects of ergot
on the blood-pressure and the uterus, have been obtained in a state
of chemical purity. To this alkaloid the scientific name “Ergotoxine”
has been given. In ‘Ernutin,’ Burroughs Wellcome & Co. are enabled
to present a preparation of uniform potency, containing the specific
active therapeutic principles of ergot, chief of which is the alkaloid
ergotoxine, in a state of purity which up to the present has never
been approached. It is physiologically standardised by observation of
its effects on the vaso-motor functions of the sympathetic nervous
system.

[Sidenote: Aconitine]

ACONITINE as met with in commerce has been found to vary greatly in
purity, and therefore in physiological effect. It is of the utmost
importance that a definite strength should uniformly attach to so
powerful a drug, and this is secured in the ‘Wellcome’ Brand product,
which is free from pseudaconitine and japaconitine, and from the
non-toxic aconine and benzaconine.

[Sidenote: Atropine Cocaine]

The alkaloid ATROPINE is, under this brand, issued free from hyoscine
and hyoscyamine. COCAINE and its hydrochloride are prepared in a state
of purity answering fully the most rigid tests.

[Sidenote: Aloin, Crystal]

ALOIN (CRYSTAL). This greatly improved product is barbaloin in
well-defined crystals, and is free from resin.

[Sidenote: Bismuth Salicylate]

The bismuth salts have received much attention, a notable improvement
being made in the quality of BISMUTH SALICYLATE. It is well known that
there has been a lack of uniformity in the composition of this article,
and that not infrequently preparations have been sold under this name
which have consisted merely of a mixture of salicylic acid with the
oxide or some salt of bismuth. ‘WELLCOME’ BRAND BISMUTH SALICYLATE
is made from physiologically pure salicylic acid, and is uniform in
composition.

[Sidenote: Stable and soluble]

The scale salt known as BISMUTH AND AMMONIUM CITRATE is a very
unsatisfactory preparation. BISMUTH CITRATE (SOLUBLE), ‘WELLCOME’
BRAND, has the same therapeutic properties, but is much more stable in
character. Being very freely soluble in water and yielding a bright
solution, it is well adapted for the extemporaneous preparation of a
solution corresponding to Solution of Bismuth and Ammonium Citrate,
B.P., or for preparations in which the U.S.P. salt is used. Like the
latter, which it is designed to supersede, it is not compatible with
acid liquids.

BISMUTH AND LITHIUM CITRATE (SOLUBLE), ‘WELLCOME’ BRAND. This new
combination, in the form of handsome colourless scales, is readily
soluble in water. It is thus particularly convenient when the effects
of both lithium and bismuth are desired, as in gouty dyspepsia.

[Sidenote: Sedative and hæmatinic]

BISMUTH AND IRON CITRATE (SOLUBLE), ‘WELLCOME’ BRAND, permits the
sedative properties of the bismuth to be exerted on the digestive
organs, while the iron, which is presented in a soluble, non-irritating
and non-astringent condition, is readily absorbed to attack the anæmia
which is the exciting cause in some cases of dyspepsia. The salt is in
the form of yellowish-green scales, readily soluble in water.

[Sidenote: Definite composition]

IRON ARSENATE (SOLUBLE), ‘WELLCOME’ BRAND, differs from the insoluble
amorphous powders, of indefinite composition, so often prepared under
this name, in being a scale preparation readily soluble in water,
and containing an amount of arsenic equivalent to 34–35 per cent. of
anhydrous ferric arsenate.

[Sidenote: Soluble Manganese Salts]

A series of _soluble_ MANGANESE SALTS and combinations of the same
with Arsenic, Quinine or Strychnine are unique forms in which this
chemical may be prescribed with the best effect.

[Sidenote: Pilocarpine]

The ‘WELLCOME’ BRAND salts of PILOCARPINE, as a result of prolonged and
costly investigations, are free from the less active isopilocarpine
and the inactive pilocarpidine with which they are usually found to be
associated. The melting point indicates the high purity of these salts.

[Sidenote: Quinine Sulphate]

A special feature is made of QUININE SULPHATE in the convenient form
of _compact crystals_ occupying one-third the space of the bulky
chemical ordinarily offered.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 75020 ***
